[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, we're back
here in New York City where it's warm
and the sun sets at a normal hour of the
day and I don't need to have blackout
curtains, but I had a really good time
on our uh our recent voyage to Alaska.
>> Alaska was great. I don't know why the
overall state population has been
declining.
>> Yeah, I don't I don't It's great.
>> You move there,
>> there's nice weather, at least in the
summer.
>> In the summer,
>> beautiful scenery. Yes.
>> As much salmon as you can fish out of
the rivers. And every year you get paid
some money by the state.
>> Yeah, that's exactly right. No, there is
a lot to like about it. I think it's for
a type of person. It certainly has a lot
going for it. But it was really nice.
You know, I didn't really know much
about Alaska. I didn't have much fuel
for its layout. I didn't much have much
feel for its geography. I truly did feel
like I was sort of at the far western
edge of the empire out there. Very, very
distant. And
>> it has a very frontier feel. I mean,
that's why they call it the last
frontier.
>> Extremely frontier feel. And of course
we talked to people in all kinds of
industry there etc. But as you mentioned
one thing that people know about Alaska
I mean people know there's oil and also
people know that there is something that
kind of resembles perhaps a sovereign
wealth fund and also that every citizen
over I think the age of like 18 months
or whatever 10 months or something gets
a check from the state which sounds
pretty nice.
>> It sounds nice. It also sounds like a
loaded political and financial hot
potato, right? And I can imagine every
year there is probably lots and lots of
debate about exactly how much is going
to be dispersed, what it means for the
future of the fund, how it interacts
with state and federal funding.
I'm excited to talk about
that new relevance right to the wider
United States of America because there
is talk about starting a US sovereign
wealth fund and there is also the
payments for kids for infants from the
Trump administration.
>> That's right. That's right. Whether
anything at the federal level that
resembles a sovereign wealth fund or any
sort of fund would actually happen, who
knows? But we have certain models of all
this stuff and it's worth learning a
little bit more how they work. And I do
think to sort of conclude our our
intellectual journey and our literal
journey to Alaska, we sort of have to
touch on this element.
>> Absolutely. Let's do it.
>> Okay. Well, I'm really excited to say we
literally have the two perfect guests to
talk about the Alaska Permanent Fund and
what it is. We're going to be speaking
with Marcus Frampton. He is the CIO of
the Alaska Permanent Fund and Devin
Mitchell, CEO of the Alaska Permanent
Fund. So Marcus and Devin, thank you so
much both for coming on the OddLots
podcast.
>> Yeah, thank you. We're happy to be here.
>> Why don't we start with maybe one of you
could just give us the very quick like
what is the size of the fund and how
when and why was it started?
>> So this is Devin Mitchell and I'll take
the that question. When you think about
Alaska and you guys have a just a small
sample of Alaska, of course,
>> when you think about it, you went to the
largest city in Alaska, but if you
superimposed Alaska over the continental
US, you would have
>> each of the coasts touched by Alaska as
well as the southern and northern
borders.
>> So, it's a huge state. Let's say you
went to Nebraska. So, you didn't really
experience all that Alaska has to offer,
but certainly, it sounds like you got a
good sample.
>> The state's a young state. We became a
state in 1959.
And when Alaska became a state, there
was a lot of concern about the ability
of Alaska to support itself economically
because of a relatively small
population, remote location, lack of
understanding about the state. And so
the state was created as a resource
state, meaning that the state retained
the right the subservice mineral rights
of the land in Alaska that it selected
at statehood. And so in 1968,
Prudo Bay was discovered, the largest
oil field in North America. And the next
year in 1969, there was a lease sale
that generated $900 million of revenue
for the state. And this is at a time
when the state's budget was $150
million. And so an incredible amount of
money for the day
>> for the state. People thought it was so
much money they couldn't possibly spend
it all. It initiated a process that
resulted in the Trans Alaska pipeline
being constructed. But by the mid 1970s,
that money was clearly going to be
finally expended before the Trans Alaska
pipeline was completed. And that set the
stage for people to recognize that oil
was a one-time finite resource in a
revenue generator. And there were
forwardthinking people of that
generation that were willing to set
aside a portion of their current year
revenue for the benefit of future
generations of Alaskans. And that
culminated with a constitutional
amendment in 1976 that dedicated 25%
of royalty revenues to the state of
Alaska. It required that that that
revenue once saved be invested and it
required that the earnings of the fund
be made available to the state. And so
we've subsequently initiated the
permanent fund dividend program to allow
residents to have a stake in the program
and it's evolved today to where it's our
largest single revenue source at
approximately 60% of the state's
revenue.
>> Yeah, that's a that's a hefty chunk.
Marcus, why don't you give us from the
sort of portfolio standpoint, talk to us
about how the fund has evolved over
time. So 1976, you know, it gets set up.
What do the initial investments look
like and what do they look like today?
>> Yeah, sure. So this is Marcus Frampton.
I'm the chief investment officer.
Initially, when the fund was set up, we
were in a very high interest rate
environment. At the end of the 70s,
equities had kind of fallen out of favor
and so it was very much a fixed income
fund up until the mid 1980s. Real estate
was introduced at that point as the
second asset class. In the early '9s,
first domestic stocks and then later in
the mid '90s, international stocks were
added. In the early 2000s, we added
hedge funds and private credit and
private equity and have grown those
alternative asset classes like many of
our peers, the university endowments and
pensions have grown. So today the fund
itself is around $85 billion. Our
largest asset class is is public
equities. That money is managed against
the all country world index. So a very
global index. We trade bonds internally
high yield through investment grade and
then have alternatives and privates that
are kind of 40% of the fund today. So
our asset allocation is not unlike you
know many university endowments or
pension funds today. And we managed to
an inflation plus 5% return with the aim
of dispersing roughly 5% of the fund to
the state both for state spending and
the dividend program and then having the
remainder maintain its value with
inflation is why we target that
inflation plus five.
>> I'm curious, you know, markets are
markets and sometimes asset valuations
go down in a year. What happens then for
either the fund or Alaska when there's a
bad year? Maybe it's like 2022 and
stocks have a pretty rough year or 2008
and 2009 and stocks have a rough year.
What happens when you can't satisfy the
demand for state revenue or you know I
guess partly those dividends? What
happens both with the fund in terms of
how and how the state budget works?
>> Yeah. Well, at a high level, we've got a
very complicated system with a
constitutionally protected principle and
then an earnings reserve that
accumulates realized earnings. And so,
at the investment level, we're
rebalancing. We're buying stocks and
doing all the things all investors do.
But I'll hand it to Devon on how we
think about the pressure on the earnings
reserve in those situations.
>> Sure. So, as I said earlier, the the
constitution was pretty broad in how it
established the fund. And then there's a
statutory overlay on top of that. And
the statutory overlay defines
earnings or revenue that's available to
appropriate as realized income. And so
when we have unrealized income, we hold
it in either principal or what we call
the earnings reserve account. That's
where we hold the realized earnings of
the fund and a prata allocation of
unrealized earnings. So, so when you
break down that 85 billion that Marcus
referred to earlier, you have about 59
billion that's actually protected
principle of the permanent fund. Then
you have about 13 billion of unrealized
gains allocated to principal. And then
you have the earnings reserve account
which is the portion that the
legislature can appropriate out of. It
has about 6.4 billion that's available
for appropriation at this point has
about 2.3 billion of unrealized gains
that are allocated towards it. And then
that combined is around $9 billion. And
then we have the current year's PMV. And
our PMV structure has only been in place
since 2019. It's a historical 5-year
average 5% draw structure. and has like
I said been providing the majority of
state revenues since but prior to that
the only thing funded out of the
permanent fund were permanent fund
dividends. So that was a big shift time
frame that we've gone through in the
last six or seven years. As far as what
we would do in a negative earnings year
if we had unrealized losses, it would
just diminish that war chest of
unrealized gains we currently have. If
it were to erode beyond that level, then
you would be in a situation at some
point where the the earnings reserve
account would be deficient and there
wouldn't be a an ability to provide for
a transfer to the state of Alaska. And
that in part is why we've been
advocating at the fund based on our
trustees direction to
evolve the fund from this historical
model created 50 years ago to something
that's a little more modern and more a
little more in line with a true
endowment or sovereign wealth fund and
recognize the importance to the the
state's annual revenue stream that it
now represents. So, in a year like 2025,
if Joe and I were flies in the room when
you were maybe actually mosquitoes in
the room, given that it's Alaska, if we
were in the room when you were making
the decision about what this year's
dividend payout is actually going to be,
what would the conversations actually
sound like? What are the considerations
that you're thinking about as you
announce this number?
>> So, first of all, we're not those flies.
We don't decide how big the permanent
fund dividend is going to be. We just
earn and provide the annual transfer to
the state. The policy makers that decide
how much the dividend is going to be or
the legislature and the governor. So in
2019 when they created the percent of
market value statutory structure, they
left in place the historic the
historical or legacy permanent fund
dividend statute which was an earnings
model. It was 21% of the last five
completed fiscal years earnings. You
take that, you take split it in half.
Half goes to the permanent fund
dividend, half goes theoretically to the
state, although the state always just
put their half back into the fund. And
so our governor has proposed each year
of his administration that that formula
be followed for purposes of establishing
the permanent fund dividend. The
difficulty has been that oil revenues
have diminished for the state of Alaska.
They're no longer robust enough to
provide for the services that re
residents expect. And so the
legislaturator's gone through a process
of determining how much can they provide
for a permanent fund dividend. At the
same time, they provide some level of
services that the residents expect. And
as you might be able to predict during
an election year, miraculously they find
ways to have a little bit larger
permanent fund and during non-election
years maybe they're a little more
austere. But it's it's been a struggle
and a more of a debate these last six
years.
>> Yeah. And actually could you talk about
that a little bit more from your
perspective of thinking about the
long-term health of the state of Alaska,
the long-term health of the fund and so
forth? How can either political elected
leaders or people such as yourself whose
job is to safeguard the fund for the
long term for the benefit of the state
of Alaska, you know, avoid essentially
people eating the seedcore, right?
Because that's what we're talking about,
right? Of course, in an election year,
everyone, Democrat or Republican, is
going to be about protecting or
expanding the dividend regardless of the
performance, regardless of how big oil
royalties are. How do you sort of keep,
you know, I think there's versions of
this debate that happen in DC. What is
the discussions like to keep those
choices essentially fiscally responsible
for the long term?
I think the discipline that's required
in any financial system is something
that we circle around to continually
that in the event that you exceed what
we've determined to the best degree
possible is a reasonable draw. the 5%
historical draw is a reasonable draw. If
you want to ensure that you have an
inflation proof fund into the future
that to the extent you deviate from that
because there's available money in the
stat in the earnings reserve account,
that's just the first time that you're
going to overspend and next year there's
going to be another reason that you
overspend and you're almost ensuring
that the system's going to fail. And I I
circle around to why does this money
even exist? It exists because there were
50 generations of Alaskans before this
generation that didn't spend all of the
current year revenue that came in. They
put some of that revenue aside. And they
didn't do that for the benefit of any
individual that was going to live in the
state of Alaska in 2025 or 2026. They
did it for the state of Alaska. So the
state of Alaska would have the resources
to survive into the future. And so that
sacrifice of the past generations of
Alaskans to ensure that we have this
incredible resource and revenue source
for the state to provide for not just
services. Remember, we're not just
arguing about school funding and public
safety and roads and the normal things.
We're arguing about how much money to
give away. Yeah. That to to our
residents. That that that's such an
incredible gift that the past
generations have given to this
generation. And that same gift needs to
be enshrined for the future of the
state.
[Music]
Marcus, how does declining oil revenue
or just the cyclicality of the oil
business feed into your actual
investment decisions? You know, if the
price of crude goes down, are is that a
year where maybe you invest in riskier,
higher yielding things, do you calibrate
it in that way?
>> Yeah, sure. So, today the royalty income
to the fund is less than a billion a
year and we're dispersing over three
billion a year to the state through the
5% draw. So, movements in oil do impact
our inflows, but very marginally
relative to the size of the fund. And
there have been arguments at times of
whether we should invest in oil and gas
given the state's exposure. And we've
ended up deciding that we do want
exposure to oil and gas investments. And
so in periods like 2020 and 2021 have
leaned into energy, private equity, and
things like that. So we like investing
in energy, but it doesn't have a an
outsized impact on the cash flows of the
fund given the size of the royalties.
>> I'm actually really intrigued by that.
Can you talk more about that? Cuz I
remember sometimes you hear about these
questions. Should people in finance have
exposure to banks right in their
portfolio? There's a good reason to say
no because their career is going to be
levered to the cycle of the financial
cycle and if they get laid off, it's
probably going to be at a time when bank
stocks are low and so forth. So that's
actually a very interesting dimension.
Can you talk a little bit more about the
reasoning for the sort of in a way
double exposure to energy that the fund
has? Yeah, I mean we feel like energy is
an attractive area. So many investors
don't want to be in fossil fuels that
even today I mean in 2021 there was a
clear scarcity of capital and there were
comments being made that
>> people weren't going to be using fossil
fuels in 10 years which like clearly in
our opinion contradicted the data. So we
just liked it from an opportunistic
standpoint. I mean, I think that it's a
small enough portion of the S&P 500 and
our private equity benchmark that, you
know, if the index is at 4% and we're at
five, it's it's not like an outsized
impact. I mean, you see tech people that
work at Google and their whole
portfolios in in tech and I would advise
against that, but I think our sizing is
reasonable and we like the outlook for
oil and gas. So, we're active there.
Just to give you an idea of the
magnitude of the royalties that are
coming to the fund at this point, the
high and the low over the last 10 years
are only $200 million apart. 315ish for
the low and 540ish for the high. And so
in comparison to revenues and
investments of the fund fairly
inconsequential
>> other than generating a return and being
able to fund the state and pay out a
nice bonus to citizens which you know in
itself are two big things to be doing.
Are there any other goals that you have
in terms of investment? Are you trying
to build out more infrastructure in
Alaska? Are you conscious of the
specific projects that you're funding?
We invest entirely with a financial lens
and that was with the exception of one
there's one state law that says if or in
our regs that that say that if there's
an investment of equivalent risk and
return we should prefer the Alaskan
investment. It's very difficult to
measure that like if you look at the
stock market I think there's one stock
Northr Bank that's an Alaskanbased stock
on an exchange. So, a strict
interpretation would be that we have to
like compare Northr Bank to every
community bank. And I like Northr Bank
and like we own stock at North Bank, but
there's a limit to how much you can have
in a 300 million market cap
>> community bank. And so,
>> it's done pretty well. I just pulled up
the chart. It's a it's a pretty it's a
small little bank, but it looks like
this. It's a nice chart. Anyway,
>> yeah. And I have an account there. I
like Northr Bank. But so, none of this
is meant to denigrate North Bank. We
love North Bank. But um so when there
are opportunities in Alaska,
we will take a look probably more
frequently than we would if it was a
random opportunity in another state. But
our mandate is very much highest and
best return financially. And some of our
private equity managers have done deals
in the state and we have some minor
investment activity in the state, but
that's the overall look that we take.
And again, it goes back to the
development fund model versus a public
trust model. And that was the debate
that happened in the 1970s from 76 to
1980. And the public trust model won
rather than we're going to try to invest
this money in Alaska and develop Alaska.
Alberta Heritage Fund is actually a a
good proxy for how you might expect a
fund to have performed if it were a
development model. And when you compare
the performance of their fund relative
to ours, it certainly financially is
worked up worked out to Alaska's benefit
to have the public trust and just
looking for the best investment as
Marcus described.
>> Marcus, while we have you here, can you
tell us a little bit about your sense of
the state of private assets? Because two
things, a you always hear it's the
golden age of private credit. I don't
really know what that means. You just
hear about private credit all the time.
But also with private assets in general,
you hear particularly on the private
equity side and maybe you hear it on the
VC side too, the sort of posity of
distributions and so forth and this idea
that they haven't been coming and
questions about returns like you sitting
here on August 13th, 2025. How are you
thinking about the past results but also
opportunity set right now that exists in
privates?
>> Yeah, sure. I would say generally I'm
quite cautious on privates. I mean I
started my career at Lehman Brothers in
' 01 and I remember going through LBO
training and you know you sketch out
your typical LBO's maybe five six times
EBIDA with three four times leverage and
the debt pays down and by the end of the
2000s buyouts were 8 n times IBIDA and
now on average US mid-market buyouts are
mid- teens IBIDA multiples and a lot of
money's gone into private so we're we
benefited from leaning into privates
from call it 2010 to 2020 and we just
felt kind of in 2021 that it's unlikely
that investors are going to get the
return premium and I'm talking about
private equity now so like we cut our
commitment pace to private equity about
in half in end of 2021 and we've kept it
around there and ticked it up a little
bit but we're still like well below
where we were deploying 5 years ago. We
have an allocation to private credit. I
think that's something we debate
regularly and it's maybe 4% of our fund.
I think if you look at the unlevered
yield on middle market direct lending
versus high yield or levered loans
versus where it was 5 years ago. I think
maybe you're getting 100 basis point
spread today versus several hundred a
few years ago. I mean it's just not even
debatable that it's less attractive than
it was. And then if you go through a
recession cycle, default cycle, I think
it'll really get tested. So we're kind
of been tapping the brakes on privates
the last few years and are pretty
cautious on the outlook right now.
>> What have you been doing this year in
terms of allocation because the word
uncertainty seems to come up a lot in
conversations nowadays. There's
uncertainty over policy and of course
uncertainty over the direction of the
economy. Are you more cautious or are
you I guess changing any of your
traditional allocations?
>> I think right now is a really tough time
to make like macro calls. I mean, you've
got big budget deficits that aren't
going to come down anytime soon and you
probably have Fed funds coming down
rapidly in the next year with a new Fed
share. So to want to be like underweight
equities right now.
>> So like we're kind of like hugging
benchmarks on not wanting to be under or
overweight equities, but it's just an
expensive market. So if you didn't have
that dynamic of rates coming down, you I
think you'd want to be really cautious
right now. But then given that backdrop,
you kind of just have to take the long
view, allocate in line with benchmarks.
And like I said on privates, we're
definitely tapping the brakes. We deploy
every year and because we cut our
pacing, we're still deploying, but just
much less. And we're getting more in
distributions and contributions on our
private equity portfolio, which is
unique and kind of a luxury. So even
though we're kind of in line with our
benchmarks, I sort of root for a
dislocation because we're very well
positioned from a liquidity standpoint
with the reduced private pacing.
>> Devin, can you talk more about the sort
of the legal status of the fund? Uh
there was an amendment to the Alaska
State Constitution that established it.
I have to imagine that an amendment is
like a very difficult is a very legally
secure backing for you. I don't know the
Alaska constitutional process, but
constitutions are hard to change. But
when you think about past your tenure,
past all of our tenure, like how legally
durable is the fund and how hard would
it be? Yes, politicians are always going
to one year try to give more away to the
voters, etc. But how hard is it if
enterprising politicians actually wanted
to change the legal strength of the
fund?
It's very difficult to change the
structure of the fund in a durable way.
Statutoily, it's not that difficult. The
that's a simple majority in concurrence
of the governor and you can change
statutes. The reason it took a
constitutional amendment to create the
permanent fund is our constitution has a
prohibition on dedication of revenues.
And so in order to have a dedicated
revenue pledge, there had to be an
amendment. It was a overwhelming
majority. It was just about twothirds of
the people of the state voted for it.
today. The idea of shifting the fund
into what I alluded to earlier, a true
endowment structure with a 5% draw
rather than the noise that I described
in the earnings reserve, the potential
of a failed draw, the potential of an
overdraw, the inflation discussion and
the intergenerational compact discussion
that that we really need a
constitutional amendment to get to that
point. And it would require a twothirds
vote of the legislature and then a vote
of the people to ratify it. And what
quickly happens because we've had 45
years of people getting a dividend that
when they think about the permanent
fund, they don't really consider some of
those larger issues. They tend to
gravitate towards, hey, I got a check
last year. What's my check going to be
next year? Where's my check? How come my
check's not bigger? How come you're not
f following that statutory formula and
I'm not getting four grand instead of
1,500?
That's the conversation that people are
having. And once you dive in, they go,
"Oh, oh, I understand. It actually is
funding my child's school or it's
actually keeping me safe on the road.
It's doing these other things at this
point." And that's where that
educational process is is has been the
challenge. We have had decent traction
in the we have a bianual legislative
session. So a two-year uh session where
they meet one year and then they carry
forward those bills to the next. This is
the second year of that session. We had
a number of hearings last session on the
concept of a constitutional amendment
and there's
I don't know maybe it's a 5050. Maybe
it's not quite that good shot that we'll
be able to get the legislature to
consider something like that because
your your opening discussion about the
seed corn of the state being potentially
eaten that appeals to I think the right
and the left likes the idea of making
sure that you can fund your muchneeded
project or programs every year. And so
there's kind of a balance across the
two. just how do you bridge that
dividend question I think is the sticky
wicket.
>> I don't know. I could see school
services versus down payment on a new
snowmobile being a tough choice for some
Alaskans. But on this note, I realize
this isn't necessarily your wheelhouse,
but do you notice any like macroeconomic
impacts from the dividend? Or maybe a
broader question would be how does it
fit into Alaska's overall culture? You
know, around dividend time, do you start
to see advertisements for how to spend
that extra money? How does it actually
impact Alaskans behavior?
>> Oh, absolutely. You see, there will be
sales. The airlines that serve Alaska
all have permanent fund dividend sales.
you have if you go buy a Costco on the
day that dividends are distributed you
will be waiting in line a long time
there there is absolutely an economic
impact on the state and similarly from
the the transfer that's used for state
services that cycles within the state as
well I mean Alaska still has a
relatively small GDP it vacasillates
based on the price of oil but 40 to 70
billion a year and so when you compare
that to some of the larger states, it's
pretty pretty small and fairly
concentrated. Even though there's
diversity from an employment
perspective, from a revenue perspective,
still a lot of concentration in oil and
now investment income from the permanent
fund. And so it's interesting
to consider if the permanent fund didn't
exist. Alaska, you were talking about a
shrinking population and I think that's
driven by a number of different factors,
some of which are economic
opportunities, maybe being more
comparable to what they are in the
continental US where at one point if you
moved to Alaska, you expected to make
more than you would make in the
continental US. I have a guy that I used
to work with, he moved to Alaska to to
work in the Tongas National Forest as a
logger. He said that he made enough
money in one month to buy a brand new
pickup truck.
>> Wow.
>> And so you you think about today and how
many months you have to work to buy a
brand new pickup truck and he would be
making, you know, let's say it's a not
that nice of four-wheel drive pickup.
$50,000 he made that month, which wages
aren't the same. And of course, logging
isn't happening on that industrial scale
in Alaska anymore either. But even a
slope worker is not making $50,000 a
month. And so when when you look at some
of the other sectors in the economy that
there are bright spots but certainly
there's some struggles as well
[Music]
is another question I guess it's sort of
looking forward and again not necess
necessarily the wheelhouse of the fund
per se, but just thinking about the
economy of Alaska. When we were there,
we heard a couple different things like,
okay, so you're talking about the oil
royalties in general, like sort of
long-term decline. We heard someone talk
about, well, maybe like Alaska could one
day be a hydrogen hub, that there's a
lot of opportunity to harness solar and
wind and wave power to turn water into
hydrogen, and that could be a new boon
for the state of Alaska. I know there's
talk maybe one day Alaska could be a
important destination for data centers
because you could save on cooling costs
by just constructing them in a cold
climate etc. When you think about either
the state of Alaska or the future of the
fund, do you try to think about possible
right tail upside scenarios for what the
economy of Alaska could look like 10, 20
years down the road?
>> From the funds perspective, we tend to
just focus on institutional investing.
From the policy Alaska perspective,
those are obviously all very interesting
things to consider. And when you're
thinking about Alaska, and again, it's a
huge state, 586,000 square miles. And so
it you can cut Alaska in half and make
Texas the third largest state. It's
huge. It's people, you know,
>> everyone measures Alaska in number of
Texas. Yeah. And Texas do that to the
other states, too. So it's this Russian
nesting doll of states lording over
lording their square miles over other
states. Anyway, keep going. But I it's
maybe we're a little defensive because
Alaska is on a different scale on most
maps. We're out in the Pacific Ocean and
it looks like we're about half the size
of Texas and so perhaps that's what
drives that that emphasis. But certainly
from a resource development perspective
and the open skies are like if somebody
needed space, there's incredible spaces
in Alaska. Obviously, we have a lot of
beautiful spaces that that are protected
for both at the national and state level
for future generations, but there's a
lot of land that's available for other
uses. And so as those ideas come along
and they make economic sense, I think
that's the critical hurdle for Alaska is
that we have historically
dreamed big and the states had enough
revenue, surplus revenue to make
attempts at at stimulating economic
development. And it's proven to be very
difficult for a government to
>> to force economic development. It has to
happen more organically. And so as
people recognize the strengths that
Alaska represents and maybe there's the
distances don't make as big a difference
because of satellite communications or
other technologies that make the
delivery of information seamless from
other locations and like you said then
that with lowcost energy combined with
colder climate could result in a data
center development trend. But I think
all of it's a little we're going to wait
and see at this point. Be supportive
from our perspective, but we're just
going to focus on investing money.
>> Marcus, I want to go back to private
credit for one second because I found
what you were saying really interesting
that you've dialed down your exposure
since 2020. You know, a lot of big funds
out there, a lot of endowments would
argue that one of their competitive
advantages is that they can buy and hold
ill liquid investments because they
don't necessarily face the same outflow
pressures as say a mutual fund or
someone like that. How do you actually
use your or deploy your I guess
illiquidity premium? Is that something
you think about? And if you're not doing
it in private credit, are you sort of
letting that competitive advantage go to
waste? I don't think of it as like an
illquidity premium that you get. I think
it's an ili liquidity premium that you
have to demand. I mean like in private
credit our allocation has stayed roughly
the same. We've just committed less. And
so across and private equity too and
across the industry you see investors
that are over their target allocation
now, right?
>> And they may in the future have to
reduce down their pacing. And so I feel
like if you look at private credit, the
illiquidity premium that you're getting
without adjusting for defaults has
declined in the last 5 years. And so
we've been less enthusiastic about it.
And if you adjust for defaults, you may
not even be getting a premium in private
equity and private credit today. It's
like a debate like are you getting an
appropriate illquidity premium? So I
think of it as kind of like keeping our
powder dry for a different environment
where there is real opportunistic
situations that you can demand a very
high return premium for locking up your
money for 10 years. I don't think it's
like I I think it's a market thing that
in different markets you may not even
get an ill liquidity premium and we may
be close to that now and in those
situations liquidity should be valued
and I think liquidity should be valued
now whereas 10 years ago it was a real
compelling environment for uh harvesting
liquidity premium.
>> Yeah, you kind of touched on this
earlier the idea that you're hoping for
some sort of dislocation to take
advantage of which we're journalists. We
like it when stuff happens and we have a
lot to talk and write about. But what
dislocation are you sort of envisioning
here?
>> Well, it depends on the asset class. I
mean, in fixed income, for example,
we've had like very tight spreads for a
very long time and our fixed income team
is kind of just trying to stay out of
trouble. If you look at a month like
April, the first two days the market was
down over 10%. Most pension funds and
endowments rebalance monthly because our
benchmarks rebalance monthly. We've
decided that we just are going to ignore
that. And so we like bought the dip
aggressive.
>> Congratulations.
>> And then it was so it was so brief that
it's a blip in the performance. But I
mean I think that there's could be
trouble lurking in private equity. There
could be trouble lurking in commercial
real estate. I don't know on private
credit. I'm not like making a call that
it's headed for disaster. I just don't
think you're getting a real compelling
premium for locking up your money. But
in some of those areas that could get
dislocated like private equity or
commercial real estate like we want to
be the the buyer with deep pockets in a
dislocation and when you look around the
industry people that are overallocated
to private equity I think will find that
they don't have that luxury and like we
want to have that luxury you know and a
cycle will come. It may not be. It
probably will not be next year with
rates coming down. Or maybe it will be
because no one thinks it will.
>> I I have a real short question then a
real question. The short question is if
there's some manager alt manager of any
sort, do they have to fly to Juno and
meet you or do you go to the lower 48 or
how does that how do those introductions
work? Yeah, when I started here about 10
years ago, we were really building out
private markets and we had this
>> idea that we should kind of haze
managers and not only should they come
out, they should come out in January and
>> and do a glacier cruise with high uh
high waves. Anyway,
>> when we started trying to get into the
real Premier Venture funds and stuff, we
realized that was not a good model. So,
we've we've been using our Alaska Air
miles.
>> Okay, real question. This is the last
thing for me. So it occurred to me and I
bring this up because of the mention of
logging and your mention of oil earlier.
Famously David Swintson at Yale made
timber allocation part a core part of
his portfolio. And there's all this
thinking that like natural resource
envir investments like that could play a
good diversifying role that they were
sort of as cyclical in certain ways and
they're very natural in the endowment
setting. you're in a resource extraction
state and so I'm curious if you have any
thoughts today setting aside the point
you made about oil and maybe there was s
not enough capital exposed to it in 2021
whether you have any thoughts about in
the modern era do resource industries
can they still play that role in a
long-term portfolio where they deliver
returns that aren't necessarily in line
with what like quote risky assets are
doing in a given year?
>> Oh, I think so. I think commodities and
resources have always been an
interesting area to look, but like one
of my favorite investment quotes is
Barton Big's quote that there's no
investment idea that's so good that too
much capital can't destroy it or ruin it
for everyone. And that was definitely
the case like once David Swenson
>> publicly did anything usually a lot of
people followed him and so timber kind
of got uninteresting but I mean I think
resource development mining are areas
that have been like underinvested in in
the United States at least the last
decade. So I mean that's a that's a real
interesting area for some of our private
market managers.
>> I have one more question which is I am
looking at the White House website right
now. Now I'm looking at a page that says
a plan for establishing a United States
sovereign wealth fund. And as we
discussed in the beginning, who knows if
that's actually going to happen, but
certainly there are some discussions
around it. If the US at a federal level
were to establish a sovereign wealth
fund, an SWF,
what advice would you have for something
at that level?
Well, I I mean I think setting up
something with like clear rulesbased
investment policy makes a lot of sense.
I mean, anytime you're investing public
funds, like one of the most important
things to do is to get the trust of the
citizenry, the your stakeholders in how
you're making investment decisions, how
you do due diligence, how you build a
portfolio. So I would encourage them to
think about the fact that it will likely
live beyond the current administration
to future administrations and just have
real thoughtful governance investment
committee process things like that. I
don't know. Do you have anything Deon?
>> Those were my thoughts as well. I might
layer on I it's when the idea initially
came out just from a personal
perspective. I had a little bit of uh
hard time understanding why we would be
doing that when we're in a
>> a recurring fiscal deficit situation.
The reason that most sovereign wealth
funds exist or maybe all is that there's
windfall revenue y
>> that shows up that people like I said
earlier have a vision of providing for
their residents in perpetuity from a
one-time revenue source. And so if there
were something along that line that
showed up at the national level, it
might make some sense. But you would, I
think, hope that you had a balanced
budget. You would have some methodology
for why you would be pursuing creating a
sovereign wealth fund despite having a
budget that was in imbalance. Yeah, it
definitely seems though all around the
world if you look at sovereign wealth
funds they frequently associated with
oil oil and frequently associated with
economies that are too small for the
money to be deployed in a short period
of time without creating a lot of waste
or inflation. Anyway, fascinating
conversation Devon and Marcus, thank you
both so much for coming on OddLots. I
think a conversation a lot of people are
very curious about and uh really
appreciate you both taking your time.
>> Yeah, thank you.
>> Thanks. I forgot to mention I saw a bear
on the way to work this morning.
>> Wait, grizzly or a black bear?
>> Just a black bear.
>> Oh, we have those in Connecticut.
>> Exactly. I did see one yesterday though
on my my mom's roof, which is pretty
unusual.
>> That's unusual. Yeah.
[Music]
Tracy, I love that conversation. First
of all, I I'm glad we did that after
after we had returned from Alaska cuz I
just felt like understanding just what a
distinct economy is Alaska is and the
specific needs of the Alaskan economy,
etc., and the sort of weirdness and the
exposure to booms and busts and whether
an economy that far-flung can even like
support itself like gives me a deeper
understanding of like why a state would
have the equivalent of a sovereign
wealth fund or why it would have the
equivalent of like a a small like little
universal basic income.
>> Yeah. Well, on that note, I did think it
was interesting when we asked about what
would their advice be for a federal
sovereign wealth fund and they said
something rules-based. Yes. where you,
you know, you stick to a certain payout
formula in order to insulate the fund
from political whims which change on a
sort of midterm basis. I suppose I
thought that was really interesting and
it also reminded me actually of the
conversations we had with Claudia S
about the SA rule and the idea that like
one of the reasons you want these
rules-based economic formulas is in
order to or stimulus formulas is to
insulate them from political risk.
Thought that was interesting. I also
thought I mean it sounds like being a
portfolio manager at the Alaska Fund
would be like a nice job I think.
>> Oh yeah.
>> But would you but the Alaska part would
you take it?
>> I haven't done an Alaskan winter so I
highly suspect my opinions of living in
the state would change drastically if I
was there in January versus August. Can
I say something that is not meant to be
insulting to anyone who lives there or
any of the wonderful guests that we've
had on
>> is certainly not meant to be insulting
to anyone? Yeah. Who anyone who lives in
Alaska? There are a lot of bars in
Anchorage. There are a lot of dive bars.
I feel like there's a reason I do not
Yes, that too. I suspect that there is a
link between all those bars in like 8
months where the sun comes up at like 11
a.m. and goes down at 4 p.m.
>> It's a long winter. You got to go
somewhere.
>> You got to do something. It seems like
pretty tough on the human condition. Two
other things I thought were interesting.
So on that point about whether a
national sovereign wealth fund makes
sense. I do agree with like this basic
idea like
>> where it's most logical is if you have
this big windfall of money
>> and you can't put it all into the
economy right now because you lack the
capacity right you create inflation
whatever I think that we don't have
anything like that condition we don't
have big some big windfall of money
>> etc and then the other thing too is I
like getting their take on just asset
markets right now and private credit and
it's just that yeah this is not as maybe
it's not the golden age right now
>> all right shall Should we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. You can follow our
producers Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman
Arman Dash Bennett at Dashbot and
Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoy Odd Thoughts, if you
like it when we travel to far-flung
states, then please leave us a positive
review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]